(glossary)=
# Glossary

:::{glossary}

tl;dr
:  "Too long; didn't read."
   In other words, a quick summary of the content that follows.

action
:  A general term for a {term}`method`, a {term}`visualizer`, or a {term}`pipeline`.
   Actions are always defined by QIIME 2 {term}`plugins <plugin>`.

artifact
:  Artifacts are QIIME 2 {term}`results <result>` that are generally considered to represent intermediate data in an analysis, meaning that an artifact is generated by QIIME 2 and intended to be consumed by QIIME 2 (rather than by a human).
   Artifacts can be generated either by importing data into QIIME 2 or as out from a QIIME 2 {term}`action`.
   When written to file, artifacts typically have the extension {term}`qza`.
   Artifacts can be provided as input to QIIME 2 {term}`actions <action>` or exported from QIIME 2 for use with other software.

breaking change
:  A *breaking change* is a change to how a program works (for example, a QIIME 2 plugin or interface) that introduces an incompatibility with earlier versions of the program.
   This will generally require that users make some modification to how they were using some aspect of a system.
   For example, if a plugin method added a new required input in version 2, that would be a breaking change with respect to version 1: calling the method without that new parameter would fail in version 2, but would have succeeded with version 1.
   This may also be called a backward incompatible change or an API change.

conda metapackage
:  A metapackage is a package with no files, only metadata.
   They are typically used to collect several packages together into a single package via dependencies.
   ([source](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/stable/resources/commands/conda-metapackage.html))

deployment
:  An installation of QIIME 2 as well as zero-or-more {term}`interfaces <Interface>` and {term}`plugins <Plugin>`.
   The collection of interfaces and plugins in a deployment can be defined by a {term}`distribution` of QIIME 2.

distribution
:  A collection of QIIME 2 plugins that are installed together through a single {term}`conda metapackage`.
   These are generally grouped by a theme. For example, the *amplicon distribution* provides a collection of plugins for analysis of microbiome amplicon data, while the *metagenome distribution* provides a collection of plugins for analysis of microbiome shotgun metagenomics data.
   When a distribution is installed, that particular installation of QIIME 2 is an example of a {term}`deployment`.

DRY
:  An acronym of *Don't Repeat Yourself*, and a critical principle of software engineering and equally applicable in research data management.
   For more information on DRY and software engineering in general, see {cite:t}`pragprog20`.
   The {cite:t}`pragprog20` content on DRY is available in a [free example chapter here](https://media.pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/dry.pdf).

epoch
:  An identifier referencing a release cycle of QIIME 2.
   Epochs identifiers represent dates (e.g., `2024.10` references the release cycle initiated in October of 2024).

Interface
:  The layer of QIIME 2 that users (either humans or other computer software) interact with.
   {term}`q2cli` and the {term}`Python 3 API` are the two interfaces covered in *Using QIIME 2*.
   Other interfaces include *Galaxy* (see https://cancer.usegalaxy.org) and Adagio (more info on that soon!).

method
:  A type of QIIME 2 {term}`action` that takes one or more {term}`artifacts <artifact>` or {term}`parameters <parameter>` as input, and produces one or more {term}`artifacts <artifact>` as output.
   For example, the `filter-features` {term}`action` in the `q2-feature-table` {term}`plugin` is a {term}`method`.

pipeline
:  A type of QIIME 2 {term}`action` that typically combines two or more other {term}`actions <action>`.
   A pipeline takes one or more {term}`artifacts <artifact>` or {term}`parameters <parameter>` as input, and produces one or more {term}`results <result>` ({term}`artifacts <artifact>` and/or {term}`visualizations <visualization>`) as output.
   For example, the `core-metrics` {term}`action` in the `q2-diversity` {term}`plugin` is a {term}`pipeline`.

plugin
:  A plugin provides analysis functionality in the form of {term}`actions <action>`.
   All plugins can be accessed through all interfaces.
   Plugins can be developed and distributed by anyone.
   As of this writing, a collection of plugins that are installed together are referred to as a distribution.
   Additional plugins can be installed, and the primary resource enabling discovery of additional plugins is the [QIIME 2 Library](https://library.qiime2.org).

Python 3 API
:  QIIME 2's Application Programmer Interface.
   This allows advanced users to access all QIIME 2 analytic functionality directly in Python.
   This can be very convenient for developing tools that use QIIME 2 as a component, or for performing data analysis without writing intermediary data artifacts to disk unless you specifically want to.

q2cli
:  [q2cli](https://github.com/qiime2/q2cli) is the original (and still primary, as of March 2024) command line interface for QIIME 2.

qza
:  An acronym for **Q**IIME **Z**ipped **A**rtifact.
   See {term}`artifact`.

qzv
:  An acronym for **Q**IIME **Z**ipped **V**isualization.
   See {term}`visualization`.

result
:  A general term for an {term}`artifact` or a {term}`visualization`.

sample
:  An individual unit of study in an analysis.

visualizer
:  A type of QIIME 2 {term}`action` that takes one or more {term}`artifacts <artifact>` or {term}`parameters <parameter>` as input, and produces exactly one {term}`visualization` as output.
   For example, the `summarize` {term}`action` in the `q2-feature-table` {term}`plugin` is a {term}`visualizer`.

visualization
:  Visualizations are QIIME 2 {term}`results <result>` that represent terminal output in an analysis, meaning that they are generated by QIIME 2 and intended to be consumed by a human (as opposed to being consumed by QIIME 2 or other software).
   Visualizations can only be generated by QIIME 2 {term}`visualizers <visualizer>` or {term}`pipelines <pipeline>`.
   When written to file, visualizations typically have the extension {term}`qzv`.
   See [](view-visualizations) for information on how to view Visualizations.

:::