(explanations-archives)=
# Understanding QIIME 2 Archives, Artifacts, and Visualizations

All files generated by QIIME 2 are either `.qza` or `.qzv` files, and **these are simply zip files that store your data alongside some QIIME 2-specific metadata**.
We refer to these files collectively as QIIME 2 Archives.

You can unzip `.qza` or `.qzv` files with any *unzip* utility, such as WinZip, 7Zip, or unzip, and you don't need to have QIIME 2 installed to do that.
Allowing users to access their data *without* QIIME 2 was one of the earliest design goals of the system.
This ensures that if QIIME 2 isn't available to you for some reason, you can still access any data that you generated with QIIME 2.

## Accessing data in a QIIME 2 Archive without using QIIME 2

It's easy to open a `.qza` or `.qzv` file to access the contents.
Here's an example of how you'd do with this `unzip`, which is built-in on macOS and some Linux distributions.
First, download a `.qza` file (or just try this on one you have on your computer already).

```
curl -sL \
  "https://docs.qiime2.org/2020.11/data/tutorials/moving-pictures/rep-seqs.qza" > \
  "sequences.qza"
```

Then, run `unzip`:

```
unzip sequences.qza
```

Notice that we haven't used any QIIME 2 commands so far.
We downloaded a file, and then unzipped it as we would any zip file.

If you look through the list of files that were created by the unzip command above, you'll see there is a top-level directory in the output with a crazy-looking name.
This directory contains copies of all of the files and directories from `sequences.qza`.
Within this crazy-named directory the `data` directory contains a single file, `sequences.fasta`, which contains (you guessed it!) sequence data in fasta format.
If, for example, you're interested in getting your sequence data out of QIIME 2 to analyze it with another program, you can unzip your `.qza` file, and use the `sequences.fasta` file for what ever you need to do with it.

## Accessing data in a QIIME 2 Archive using QIIME 2

QIIME 2 also provides some of its own utilities for getting data out of `.qza` and `.qzv` files.
If you're working with the QIIME 2 command line interface, the most relevant command is `qiime tools export`.
You could run this on the `.qza` file we downloaded above as follows:

```
qiime tools export --input-path sequences.qza --output-path exported-sequences/
```

This command will unzip the archive, and take all of the files from the `data` directory and place them in `exported-sequences`.
Thus if you do have QIIME 2 installed, you can get your data out of a QIIME 2 archive without all of the QIIME 2-specific metadata using this command.

## Why does QIIME 2 create `.qza` and `.qzv` files?

You might wonder why we bothered with having QIIME 2 create these zip files in the first place, rather than just have it use the typical file formats like fasta, newick, biom, and so on.
That has to do with the other stored in the zip file.
The other files in the zip file are not intended to be viewed by a human, and you don't need any of them to work with the file (or files) in the `data` directory.
QIIME 2 uses the information in the `provenance` directory to record data provenance, helping you to ensure that your bioinformatics work will be reproducible.
You can learn more about QIIME 2's data provenance tracking functionality in [*Facilitating bioinformatics reproducibility with QIIME 2 Provenance Replay*](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011676).

:::{warning}
QIIME 2 goes to great lengths to ensure that your bioinformatics workflow will be reproducible by you or others in the future.
This includes recording information about your analysis inside of your Results' data provenance, and the recorded information includes metadata that you provided to run specific commands.
We strongly recommend that you never include confidential information, such as Personally Identifying Information (PII) in your QIIME 2 metadata.
**Because QIIME 2 stores metadata in your data provenance, confidential information that you use in a QIIME 2 analysis will persist in downstream Results.**
Instead of including confidential information in your metadata, you should encode it with variables that only authorized individuals have access to.
For example, subject names should be replaced with anonymized subject identifiers before use with QIIME 2.
:::

QIIME 2 also stores a unique identifier (a UUID) for every archive it produces in the `metadata.yaml` file inside of the archive, which facilitates data management.
If at some point you begin generating a lot of QIIME 2 results, and want to store them in a database or otherwise uniquely identify them, these identifiers can be used for that purpose.
An archive's unique identifier is also the name of the directory that contains all of the files from the `.qza` when you unzip it.
The `metadata.yaml` file also identifies the Artifact Class of its data.

## What's the difference between `.qza` files and `.qzv` files?

The `.qza` file extension is an abbreviation for QIIME Zipped Artifact, and the `.qzv` file extension is an abbreviation for QIIME Zipped Visualization.
`.qza` files (which are often simply referred to as _artifacts_) are intermediary files in a QIIME 2 analysis, usually containing raw data of some sort.
These files are generated by QIIME 2 and are intended to be consumed by QIIME 2.
`.qzv` files (which are often simply referred to as _visualizations_) are terminal results in a QIIME 2 analysis, such as an interactive figure or the results of a statistical test.
These files are generated by QIIME 2 and are intended to be consumed by a human.
